Project Proposal
Problem description: What problem are you solving? Describe the problem formally from a computational perspective. What are the states, actions and rewards? What simulator or domain are you using (exactly)? Why is it interesting? Does it already have an interface for RL? Have other researchers already used it?
The problem that we are aiming to solve is Heads Up Limit Texas Hold’Em (which we will simply refer to as poker). The states in poker consist of a combination of the acting player’s hole cards, the amount of money in the pot, the amount of money in each player’s stack, the community cards on the board, and the previous actions taken by either player. The actions are bet, fold, call, and sometimes raise or check. Bet and raise in particular can also be further expanded as the acting player can set the amount of money associated with the action, but in practice, many poker solvers will condense this into fixed sizes that are based on a percentage of the pot. The reward is the amount of money won or lost from a hand. Poker has 3.16 x 1017 game states, but since it is a game of imperfect information (which means that players do not have access to their opponent’s hole cards), there are only 3.19 x 1014 decision points. We chose heads up because it is the only variant of hold’em that is zero sum, and limit because it drastically reduces the state space and consequently the amount of compute and memory needed for this project. The simulator that we will be using is RLCard, which supports environments for a number of games (including poker), as well as optimal models (implemented using CFR) that will be helpful for later benchmarking. This simulator is also specifically designed for RL agents (it’s literally called RLCard), and it has simple functions we can interface with, and even utilities to print out the cards in the terminal as a bonus. RLCard has eight citations, so it has been used to some extent.
Algorithms: What algorithms do you use (exactly)? What baseline methods will you compare to? Why are these algorithms appropriate? How are these algorithms typically used, and how are you using them? Have other people used similar algorithms to solve your problem before?
Baseline: CFR is an offline iterative algorithm that is based on Nash-equilibrium. It’s run over the game tree millions of times to compute a strategy table. For games like poker, it works really well with average performance. The main thing is that it does not include any notion of exploitation which makes it a perfect baseline for our algorithms. We will not be implementing this algorithm, it will be provided by the RLCard simulator
Algorithms: For the purpose of poker, we have decided on using DeepRL algorithms due to the large state space and complexity. We have two primary approaches we would like to experiment with:
Adam: A Double Deep Q-Learning (Double DQN) with a recurrent network (LSTM) to train an exploitative best-response agent. The model learns an action-value function Q(s,a) and selects the legal action with the highest predicted value, using epsilon greedy exploration during training. The LSTM allows the agent to handle partial observability by incorporating betting history within each hand. Double DQN is appropriate because limit hold’em has a discrete action space and we are training against fixed opponent strategies, making value-based best-response learning stable and effective.
Ben: An Actor critic model that learns to exploit over multiple hands. The actor in this case would be CFR which we would query for a non-exploitative action probability distribution. Then the critic would take in the actors output and be a combination of an FC layer that takes in the current state (holes, community cards, pot) and an LSTM layer that takes in the history of the game (previous states and opponents actions) which together decide whether or not the actor is leaving money on the table and what alternative action they should take instead. The hypothesis for this agent is that during the early stages of a game, it will match CFR, but in the later stages surpass and ultimately perform better. This is a structure mainly sourced from this paper (https://doi.org/10.3390/e24060774), but simplified to use CFR in order to reduce training times and cost. 
In poker, players can generally be placed on a chart resembling the one below that characterizes their overall play style.

These play styles can be discretely bucketed into labels for certain player archetypes. In poker, the leading problem from a computational and research perspective is to create a “solver” that plays GTO (game theory optimal) poker against all opponents (such that no strategy can exploit it). That problem has been solved, which is why heads up limit hold’em is considered solved (or weakly solved, to be pedantic). What’s much more interesting is that, in the real world, we do not have opponents that play GTO, so there is no need to exercise GTO strategy against them, and there is even an incentive to deviate and play strategies that are not optimal against the general population, but extremely profitable against that specific opponent. While it’s difficult in the real world to know how each specific player acts in all given situations to build out some sort of mapping (which is why humans use heuristics instead), it’s an interesting problem to consider how to use reinforcement learning, over many episodes of interaction with certain player archetypes, to develop a strategy that exploits that player, ideally profiting even more than a GTO solver. A good example to consider is rock paper scissors. In rock paper scissors, GTO is to play all three moves at an equal, random frequency. Now let’s say that there’s a player who always, without fail, plays paper. A “GTO” strategy would end up drawing against this player in the long term, since it will lose, win, and draw an equal number of times. An exploitative strategy, which is what we are trying to develop, will recognize that its opponent only throws paper, and will throw scissors every time and win every time, thereby “outperforming” GTO, even though this strategy would fail against another opponent that throws rock every time.

Results: What results do you expect to show? What comparisons will you do? Are there risks for not getting all the results? If so, what will you do about it?
Our goal for this project will be to build various agents with predetermined strategies that resemble many real world player archetypes, then to create two reinforcement learning based models that will play against each player, and finally, benchmark their accumulated rewards over the course of many episodes and compare it to the performance of a GTO solver against that player. We want to show the progression of the accumulated reward over time (which will show how well the model is learning to play against each specific opponent), and compare that to the GTO CFR solver’s accumulated rewards over the course of the same number of episodes. It would also be interesting to show how the model is specifically designed to overfit to a certain player archetype, and conversely, show that the model does not perform well against any opponent that is dissimilar from the one that it was trained against. Finally, it would be nice to have some level of observability into how the model actually plays against its opponents. For example, in the real world, we use human terms like “nit” and “steal the blinds” to describe player archetypes and strategies, but our model does not understand these terms, yet still may eventually develop a policy that resembles it. We would like to figure out a way to abstract its actions at a high level that is human understandable, and not just some black box of state to action mapping. This won’t be easy, but we will aim to produce something that is human understandable by analyzing specific episodes and its constituent actions.

Citations
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1259433
https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v36i4.20394
https://doi.org/10.3390/e24060774
https://nn.cs.utexas.edu/downloads/papers/xun.aaai17.pdf
https://nn.cs.utexas.edu/downloads/papers/xun.aaai18.pdf
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9164345/
